So now we're going to start building things with gates.
Gates are our new low-level building blocks.
So the first thing we're going to do
is add some numbers with gates.
And we're going to basically use a pattern much like this,
except that this little adding hand calculator
does numbers from zero through nine.
We're gonna do the same thing with just zero and one,
so they're gonna do base to addition,
but we're still gonna do things like carry.
So when we click over to the next one,
it carries and goes on to the next number.
And so we're gonna solve the carry problem.
At this point, you should know the truth tables
for not an and, an or, and exclusive or.
Now, not an and and or are kinda like
what you've done in programming for a long time now.
Exclusive or is just kinda weird,
meaning that it's more of a counter than a simple or,
which means if one of them is true, the output is true,
and if both are zero or both are one, the output is zero.
And of course, nand and nor
are just kind of inverted versions of and and or.
So at this point, I think you should be able to
fill these in, and I probably won't need
to explain these to you much more.
But we do wanna represent numbers larger than zero and one.
That would be kind of a limited range.
So what we use is we use base two numbers,
and we take different wires and give them different values.
And so in base two, there's a one's position,
a two's position, a four's, and an eight's position.
And so you can think of three wires can represent a number
from zero through seven.
So in base 10, 123 is one times 100, two times 10,
and three times one, which adds up to 123,
which is kind of redundant.
But if you look at base two, one, one, zero,
that's one times four, which is four,
plus one times two, which is two,
plus zero times one, which is zero,
four plus two equals six.
So to convert one, one, zero base two into base 10,
it's six base 10.
We're gonna make things simple for now.
We're not gonna make you generally be able to convert
any base 10 number.
As a matter of fact, for most of the rest of this section
of the class, we will never encounter a number
higher than zero through eight.
Mostly it will be zero through seven, and then once in a while
we'll carry into the eight's position.
So we represent the four's position, the two's position,
and the one's position.
So one, one, zero equals six.
But you can quickly say, oh, that's a four, that's a two,
and no one, which is four plus two equals six.
So you can quickly convert from that.
So the idea of having one wire represent
the ones of a number, another wire representing
the two's of the number, and another wire representing
the four's of the number, is how we can represent
a number from zero through seven.
So in this example that I've given you,
the two's wire is a one, and the four's wire is a one,
and we hook that to a Nixie tube.
Remember Nixie tubes?
The Nixie tube decodes the ones, two's, and four's,
and converts it to base 10.
So if we're putting in zero ones, one two's, and one four's,
well that's two plus four equals six.
And the Nixie tube has the logic to simply display that.
So if we can send it a set of wires, three wires,
it will show us the base 10.
And in order to help you have a good understanding
of quick conversion from base two to base 10,
at least for numbers between zero and seven,
I've got a little game called the Nixie Challenge
that both converts base two to base 10, base 10 to base two,
and adding of base two numbers.
Now speaking of adding base two numbers,
let's start at the very beginning.
One plus one equals two.
That's true in base 10, but it's not true in base two.
'Cause you don't have the digit two in base two.
So one plus one is zero, carry the one.
Just like five plus five is, in base 10,
is zero, carry the one, or 10.
So one zero base two is two because that's a one
in the two's position and a zero in the one's position.
So remember, one plus one equals zero, carry the one.
You see the same pattern when you do two plus two
equals four, zero plus zero equals zero,
one plus one equals zero, carry the one.
And again, the same thing happens
when you do four plus four equals eight.
And so now we've seen our first number greater than seven.
Four plus four equals eight.
Now you gotta carry, you gotta ripple carry
in the three plus one equals four example.
One plus one equals zero, carry the one.
Now in the second column, you gotta add that carry.
The carry one plus the top one equals zero, carry the one.
So now we end up with one, zero, zero, or four.
And so these carries can cruise along.
Three plus two equals five.
You can see there's a one plus zero equals one.
One plus one equals zero, carry the one,
which gives us one, zero, one, which is a four and a one,
which is five.
And then the last one, which is seven, all ones,
which is a four plus a two plus a one, which is seven.
Seven plus one, you start with one plus one equals zero,
carry the one, but then the carry plus the other one
is zero again, carry the one again,
and then the carry plus the one is a zero,
carry the one again, and then you end up with the one.
So seven plus one equals eight.
So the logic that we do here to do one of these columns,
so just the columns, is a thing we call the half adder.
And half adder is a logic circuit that takes as its inputs
the A and the B, and as output,
comes up with the sum and the carry.
Now for now, we're only thinking about one column
of addition, zero plus zero is zero, carry the zero.
Zero plus one is one, carry the zero.
One plus zero equals one, carry the zero.
One plus one equals zero, carry the one.
So if we look at the circuit,
the circuit is a combination of the and and an exclusive or.
And if you look at the two columns,
you look at the sum column, the sum column,
zero, one, one, zero, is just the same as a close of or,
and the carry column is just the same as the and.
So we simply take the A and the B,
both to an exclusive or gate and both to an and gate,
and out comes a sum and a carry.
So two gates gives us a half adder.
So if we look at the different values,
zero plus zero equals zero, carry the zero.
One plus zero equals one, carry the zero.
And one plus one equals zero, carry the one.
So this solves one column of addition.
But if you think about one column of addition
other than the first column, there's also a carry in.
And that's how we solve it with the full adder.
So the full adder, its truth table has a carry in,
a sum A, sum B, and then a sum total and a carry out.
So operands A and B, a carry in, sum and carry out.
So if you get a carry in, that's a one.
If you get an A of one and a B of one,
well that is three, which is the sum is one, carry the one.
So that's a little different, right?
So now we have up to three numbers.
It's kind of like a counter of three bits, right?
And it's showing us that.
But we have a carry in, A and B,
and then a sum and a carry out, okay?
And so it's pretty much what you would expect.
You can think of the sum and the carry out as like,
the carry out is kind of like a two.
When you're carrying to the next column, okay?
So let's take a look at the circuit
that needs to solve this problem.
A full adder compensates for a carry in.
So we call a full adder, a full adder
because it really is two half adders plus a little bit.
So if you look at the section that's the A and the B,
that's just a half adder.
It's got an exclusivore and an and.
And then what we have is another half adder at the top,
exclusivore two and and two.
And the input to that half adder is the carry in
plus the output of exclusivore one.
Exclusivore two produces the overall sum
of the three numbers.
And then we have to add an or gate
that takes the output of the A and B and,
as well as the and,
and we or it all together and get a carry out.
And you can look at that or as,
did we generate a carry out by A and B?
Or did we generate a carry out because A or B was one
and the carry in was one?
And that's what that or is doing.
So it's probably best to take a quick look
at how this works with a working circuit.
So here is a full adder circuit.
And so we're gonna start and work through carry in,
A and B, and then the sum and the carry out.
So we're set them all to zero, so the sum is zero.
So let's just exercise this as a half adder, for example.
So if we make A be one,
then we get a sum of one and a carry out of zero.
And if we make B be one,
then we get a sum of zero and a carry out of one.
And so the carry in is not participating in any way.
This is just a half adder that's working.
So now if we add the carry in,
so now we have carry in of one,
A of one, B of one,
and sum is one and carry out is one.
And now you can pretty much
put any combination of ones and zeros,
and this is kind of a counter
where the carry out plus the sum is like how many?
Carry in is one and A is zero and B is one.
We kind of have two ones,
and so we get a carry out of one and a sum of zero.
That's kind of one zero, which is a two, okay?
So that's a full adder.
It's basically two half adders plus an OR gate.
Now that we built this full adder,
and we won't go into too much detail here,
but this carry out was designed
to become the carry in for the next digit.
So if we look at two plus five equals seven,
we can see that the full adder
has the A for the ones column and the B for the ones column,
A for the twos column and B for the twos column,
and A for the fours column and B for the fours column.
And so because A is two, A one is zero,
A two is one, and A four is zero, so zero one zero.
B is five, and so it's one zero one.
So B one is one, B two, the twos column of B is zero,
and the fours column of B is one.
And so they just go into these full adders,
and when we say full one in here,
that is those gates that we just got done describing.
And they have a sum out, and that goes to our ultimate sum,
but the carry out of each column
goes to the carry in of the next column.
That's what's clever about the full adder.
So this is a ripple carry.
The carry is rippling from one column to the next.
On the screen, it's the top to the bottom.
So you just copy, you connect the carry outs
to the carry in of the next full adder.
And then that full adder has a carry out, and away it goes.
Now if you look at the third one,
you have the carry out that indicates an overflow indicator,
and that is this can only handle numbers from zero through seven,
but if you add five plus five, that's bigger than seven,
and the overflow indicator.
We're like, oh, now we just figured out
how to take three full adders and make a three-bit adder.
So this is a three-bit adder
with the A's on the left-hand side, zero, one, zero, or two,
and the B's on the right-hand side, one, zero, one, or five.
And you can see the adder has a seven.
We put a little display in there
so you can see the number seven,
and it has sums coming out the bottom,
and it has overflows coming out the top.
And so this is part of how digital logic works,
is that we build something cool, like a three-bit adder
that's made up of three full adders,
which each full adder is made up of two half adders
plus an OR gate, but we don't have to draw that.
We just say, give me a three-bit adder, and away you go.
And so we can quickly build abstractions
that are all really cool, reusable componentry.
And so we only build a full adder long enough
to build a three-bit adder
to build then a three-bit adder component.
And so we can build these things pretty rapidly,
and now you can start to see
how we might eventually build a microprocessor.
At least now we have a three-bit adder.
And if you listen carefully,
maybe go back and watch this again,
if you look at it carefully, you'll see, you know,
if you go all the way back, you know how many transistors
that you could make a three-bit adder,
but it would be a bunch of 'em.
It would be a bunch of 'em.
'Cause remember, an AND gate is
four transistors plus the NOT, which is two transistors.
So an AND gate is six transistors,
and that's just an AND gate.
So you figure out after a while that building gates
and then building reusable components,
you know how to build 'em,
but you don't have to know how to build 'em
to use a component like a three-bit adder in a circuit.
And that's the fun of it all.
And we're gonna keep doing this as we go forward.
(upbeat music)